# lore

A library for procedurally generated text, for use in games, Twitter bots, and other fun things like [NaNoGenMo](https://github.com/NaNoGenMo/). Name comes from the original idea of a building a "lore engine" into a game, to provide textual backstories on the fly.

The three components of the system are a [Tracery](tracery.io)-inspired substitution system, a nouns/object system, and an action system for defining what actions can happen to those nouns. Events generated by the noun and action system use the grammar (text substitution) system to turn events into narrative. (The nouns and actions systems are inspired by [Sea Duck](https://github.com/aparrish/seaduck), to give due credit, as well as the concept of Component-Entity-Systems in game engines.)

Lore is written in Fennel and can be used in Lua projects as well. To use in a Lua project, see the [Embedding docs for Fennel](https://fennel-lang.org/tutorial#embedding).


## Usage

### Text expansion / generation

Simple example in Fennel:

```
(local lore (:require lore))

(local grammar {"#name#" ["Hagar" "Conan" "Attila" "Gunthur" "Genghis"]
	        "#title#" ["Sad" "Terrible" "Strong" "Weak" "Feeble"]
		"#origin#" "I am #name# the #title#."})

(for [i 1 5]
  (print (lore.generate-one grammar)))
```

Will output something like:

```
I am Attila the Feeble.
I am Hagar the Sad.
I am Hagar the Strong.
I am Gunthur the Terrible.
I am Conan the Weak.
```


### Nouns and actions

Nouns are simply tables (hashes) with keys and values on them, for setting up "things" that will be useful in your narrative. Here's an example of a person and a banana:

```
(local nouns [{:name "Ronald"
	       :hungry-percent 50
	       :person true}
	      {:name "banana"
	       :food true
	       :eaten false}])
```

Actions are a series of functions for manipulating nouns. Actions are implemented as tables that contain at least a filter function and an update function. The update function takes as parameters the action that called it and an entity that matched its filter, and can update the state of the scene and/or the entity. Any strings returned by the update function get appended to the scene's lines, which are generally used as the narrative output.

As a shorthand, instead of specifying a filter function, you can use `filter-tags` to list which keys on the entity you want to be present to invoke the action. This saves you from writing a complex filter-fn yourself.

For example,

```
(local actions [{:name "eats"
		 :filter-tags [:person]
		 :update (fn [action e] (tset e :hungry false) (line-for action e))
		 :grammar {"#origin#" "#name# eats."}}])
```

An action that writes its own `filter-fn` rather than using `filter-tags will look like:

```
{:name "eats"
 :filter-fn (fn [e] (and e.hungry-percent) (> e.hungry-percent 75))
 :update (fn [action e] (tset e :hungry-percent (- e.hungry-percent 50)) (line-for action e))
  :grammar {"#origin#" "#name# eats a banana and is now #hungrypercent#% hungry."}
```

The last concept needed is the scene, or the world. The scene is another table with the nouns and actions set on it, and then set up by the `prepare-scene` function, which registers some functions and checks data is consistent. Generally, once a scene has been "prepared", we call it the world.

To perform one round of actions, simply call the `tick` function on the world. Actions are called in the order that they are defined in the list. Repeated ticks will generate more and more lines in `world.lines`.

<!-- See [lore example](https://github.com/mathias/lore-example) for an example of Lore used as a history generator for a made-up game. -->

## TODO

- [ ] Add an English modifiers function like [Tracey](tracery.io) has.
- [x] Add the ability to track "objects" (nouns) and have arbitrary attributes on them, to further make sophisticated generators.
- [ ] Write validation (data linter) functions `validate-actions` and `validate-nouns`.
- [ ] Unit tests.

## License

Copyright (c) 2019 Matt Gauger

MIT License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.